# Notes on C from Sololearn

## Introducing C
C is a 50+ years old, general-purpose programming language.

C is used for OS's (including Windows and many others) to complex 
programs like the Python interpreter, Git, Oracle DB, and many more.
C is versatile on purpose. It is a low-level language that relates 
closely to the way machines work while still being easy to learn.

> Understanding how computer memory works is an important aspect of 
> the C programming language. 

## Hello World!
```
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    printf("Hello, World!\n");
    return 0;
}
```
OUTPUT: 
```
Hello, World!
```
As when learning any new language, the place to start is with the 
classic "Hello World!" program: Let's break down the code to understand 
each line:
`#include <stdio.h>` The function used for generating output is defined 
in `stdio.h`. In order to use the `printf` function, we need to first include 
the required file, also called a header file.

`int main()` 

The `main()` function is the entry point to a program. 
Curly brackets `{ }` indicate the beginning and end of a function (also called 
a code block). The statements inside the brackets determine what the function 
does when executed.

*Why is `int` used instead of `func`? I would like to find out.*

```
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    printf("Hello, World!\n");
    return 0;
}
```
The `printf` function is used to generate output: Here, we pass the text `"Hello World!"` to it.
The `\n` escape sequence outputs a newline character. Escape sequences always begin with a backslash `\`.
The semicolon `;` indicates the end of the statement. Each statement must end with a semicolon.

`return 0;` This statement terminates the `main()` function and returns the value `0` to the calling process. The number `0` generally means that our program has successfully executed. Any other number indicates that the program has failed.

