# Purchasing and Insuring a Vehicle

Consider
1. Safety
2. Reliability
3. Affordability

## Safety

* ABS
* DRL
* ESC
* Airbags
* Adjustible head restraints

Sporty vehicles can tempt drivers to speed. 

SUVs can be top-heavy, increasing rollover risk. 

Midsize sedan is usually a good option, especially for new drivers.

Have your prospective vehicle inspected.

While often cheaper, the older vehicles often don't come equipped with more advanced safety systems, and they often get inferior MPG.

## Affordability

Annual expected costs of owning a car:
* $ 83: tires
* $ 454: maintenance
* $ 3297: depreciation
* $ 807: finance charges
* $ 1031: insurance
* $ 1136: fuel
* $ 585: licensing and taxes

TOTAL: $ 7,893


Different fuel systems can change fuel costs.

## Buying a NEW car

Your car payment should run between 8-10% of your monthly income.

* Research the vehicle types you are considering. 
* Secure financing
* Check with insurance company regarding expected costs
* Test drive
* Check insurance costs for vehicle
* Enjoy your purchase

## Buying a USED car

1. Determine what type of car you want
2. Determine the right price to pay (KBB, NADA.com, Carfax, cars.com)
3. Secure financing
4. Check with insurance company regarding expected insurance costs
5. Find your car.
6. Take it for a test drive. Drive 15-20 minutes as you normally would use it. Make sure it is something you would be comfortable using. 
7. Research that vehicle's Carfax report.
8. Take the vehicle to a mechanic to have a full inspection to check for any issues not already discovered.
9. Enjoy your purchase.

## Dealer experience
### Beforehand
* Secure financing and determine your budget. 
* Narrow your choices down to 2-3 types, that way you will be able to focus on the vehicles that you actually would consider buying.

### Meeting a sales rep
* Greet them.
* Explain what your looking for and what your budget is.
* When you test drive, make sure that your testing a vehicle that is the same as what you will actually be buying. Also, drive on a few different types of roads, including highways, stop-n-go traffic, etc. Can you read the guages? Does it handle well?

## Negotiating
There is generally room for negotiating for new & used cars.

**DO YOUR RESEARCH BEFOREHAND. Come to the netotiating table well-informed.**

## After purchase

* Study the owner's manual. 

## Insuring your vehicle

### Liability insurance
Most important. 

Protects against others' claims against you as a driver. 
* Bodily injury 
* Property damage

### Medical payment insurance

### Collision insurance
### Comprehensive insurance
Other than collision
### Uninsured motorist insurance
### No-fault insurance

***
Always read the fine print.

### Insurance discount
Qualifying for these can potentially save you $$$
* Safe driving record
* Multiple cars insured through same company
* High-GPA students
* Driver Education Credit 
* Occupation and habits discounts (veterans, gov workers, teachers, non-smokers, etc.)

### Car types and insurance
#### Higher risk (higher premiums)
* 2-door (sporty)
* SUV (top heavy)
* Convertible
#### Lower risk (lower premiums)
* Low horsepower sedan with high safety ratings.
* 3-5 years old with low milage. 

### COMPARISON SHOP FOR INSURANCE
* Good reputation
* Good terms
* Good track record for handling claims


