# Vehicle Space, Needs, Natural Laws & Balance

In the U.S. we have the Highway Transportation System. It involves the roadways, the vehicles, and the drivers. Highway development and use has a long history in the U.S. 

While on the road, you will likely encounter other drivers. Drive with consideration as a member of the diverse community of roadway users. 

Different vehicles have different "feels", and need to be driven with the nature of the vehicle taken into account.

Sedans offer more phycical impact protection than motorcycles. (Duh)

As technology advances, car manufacturers find innovative ways to improve safety. 

Road surfaces can affect tire traction. 

Traffic control devices should be heeded. 

Be responsible. 

[National Highway Safety Act (see more)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Traffic_and_Motor_Vehicle_Safety_Act)


While providing inputs to vehicle controls (steering wheel, pedals), try to be smooth. It makes the experience nicer.


## Situational Awareness

Always have visual awareness of what is happening 20-30 seconds forward along your intended path of travel.

Maintain a buffer of space between yourself and objects that could result in a collision. 

The faster you go, the longer the gap between you and the car ahead.

Have a Visual Control Zone of 12-15 seconds where you are anticipating alternative "escape routes" to avoid collisions. 

Have a minimum following distance of 3-4 seconds. 

## Traction

Traction enables you to steer, brake, and accelerate. 

Different road surface types have different levels of traction. From best to worst, they include:
1. Concrete
2. Asphalt
3. Brick
4. Dirt
5. Gravel
6. Sand

Road conditions can also impact traction. These all can reduce traction:
* Water, snow, or ice.
* Anything other than the road itself. Leaves, mud, litter, etc.

Road shoulders often are made of materials that have less traction than the road itself. Therefore, take shoulder conditions into account when making escape judgements.

Braking while half-on-half-off can result in an imbalance of traction, possibly resulting in a skid.

## Natual Laws and Your Driving

### Inertia
Unless acted upon by an outside force, an object in motion will stay in motion.

Inertia is very relevant for turning. When turning, there are several factors:
* Sharpness of turn
* Speed
* Vehicle size, height, and load
* Roadway slope
* Road condition

### Gravity
Objects with mass attract each other. 

The car is attracted to the center of the Earth. 

When driving downhill, gravity helps accelerate you forward. When uphill, gravity acts against you. 

BE ESPECIALLY CAREFUL when gravity collaborates with other forces (like inertia). Ex: if you are driving downhill on a curvy road. Your tires' traction must overcome both inertia and gravity to make the turn.

### Kinetic energy 
The amount of energy required to accelerate a certain mass to a certain velocity. 

The greater the speed and the greater the mass, the greater the energy. 

Doubling speed means the stopping distance is quadrupled.

Just like in a grade-school playground, DON'T MESS WITH THE BIG GUYS. A person in a very massive vehicle needs more force to feel the same net acceleration on their body. Riding in a small car means less energy is required to toss you around. 

So, the weight of a vehicle can impact its ability to absorb crash forces. 

HOWEVER, since greater weight requires greater energy to propel it, the heavier vehicles are going to be far less fuel-efficient. 

So the trade-offs need to be considered.


## Balance

Accelerating, decelerating, and turning all affect the suspension balance.

A tire's contact patch is the surface area that is in contact with the ground at any moment. The larger the contact patch, the greater the traction.

Braking increases the contact patches of the front tires.


Tip: if possible, perform ONE INPUT AT A TIME. Ex: brake, then steer, then accelerate, etc.
