# Maintaining Your Vehicle

## Tires

Make sure they are properly inflated. Check with a tire guage 1x per month. 
Check the owners manual for specific numbers on pressure. When checking pressure, check 
when the tires are "cold", in other words: before driving. 

Check your tires' treads. Take a quarter and make sure George's head is at least partly covered. 

The side walls of tires provide informative data on performance expectations. 

When changing to winter tires, switch all 4. 

### Tire info

There are 3 numbers, in a format like `P235/60R18`
* First #: tire width in milimeters
* Second #: tire height in mm
* Third #: wheel diameter in inches

## Preventative

## Octane

Use the proper fuel rating for your vehicle. Use the lowest grade fuel that still prevents knocking. 

## Engine
Keep an eye on your guages on the dashboard.

## Electrical systems
Generally, you should leave electrical system work to the professionals. 

* Check battery for corrosion

## Brakes

## Exterior
* Wipers

## Inspection

Your state may require certain safety and/or emissions inspections. 

## Repair

Know your shop:
* Never accept inferior repair work.
* Make sure you are not charged for work covered under warranty.
* Have the service manager explain any charges you do not understand.
* Before you buy a new vehicle, investigate the dealer’s service reputation.
* If you think the shop is gonna fraudulently charge you for replaced parts, ask them to save and return your old parts.
* Ask that the service adviser or manager call you after an inspection to describe what needs to be done.
* Ask for a written estimate of all repair costs. This helps discourage unnecessary work.

When telling the place about your problems, talk **symptoms**, not causes. The experts' job is to properly diagnose it and fix it.
