# Vehicle Technologies

Vehicle safety technologies can make driving...safer.

But remember to read the owner's manual to know how your vehicle's systems work.

Also, your brain is the #1 safety system. 

## ABS

Helps driver to regain steering control during emergency braking.

## Electronic Stability Control (ESC)

Basically an extension of ABS. When a car is risking skidding, ESC can fine-tune controls so that the driver's inputs (so far as possible) are accurately carried out.

## Lane Departure Warning System

Helps the vehicle stay in lane when not indicating a turn signal. 

## Adaptive Cruise Control

Cruise control...but with the ability to adjust speed based on forward traffic conditions.

## Parking Assist System

Uses cameras/other sensors to detect objects while backing. May also apply brakes. 

## Event Data Recording Systems (Black Box)

Records data of vehicle before and during collision.

* Safety belts use
* Speed of engine
* Steering movements
* Braking
* Airbag deployment
* Speed of vehicle

## Blind Spot Motitoring/Detection System

Warns and possibly takes corrective action to avoid blind spot collisions.

Use effective visual scanning techniques. 

## Adaptive Headlights

Headlights themselves pivot to illuminate where you are going during a turn. 

## Night Vision System

Uses infared light to produce night vision.

## Drowsiness/Fatique Warning System

Helps drivers recognize indictions of drowsiness.

## Forward Collission Avoidance System

Helps you to avoid crashing forward.

## Traffic Jam Support System

Automatic braking and acceleration in stop-n-go traffic.
