# Minimizing Consequences of a Collission

Obviously, preventing and avoiding collissions are better than having to deal with the aftermath of a collision. But here are some tips for if one happens anyway.

## Emergency Responders

### Law Enforcement

### EMS

### Firefighters


## Safety

Driver and all passengers must be properly seated with safety belts fastened.

Pets must be secured.

Keep car doors locked while driving.
* Prevents unauthorized entry
* Prevents unintentional opening while in motion
* Prevents passengers from being ejected from vehicle

However, make sure that the passengers are able to unlock their doors when they need to exit.

## Three collisions that happen during a collision

1. First collision: occurs when a vehicle's exterior contacts an external object.
2. Second: A fraction of a sec later, the passengers contact some part(s) of the vehicle's interior
3. Third: A fraction of a sec later, the passengers' internal organs contact the walls of their body. Brain, gut, etc. push against skull and abs, etc.


## When colliding
1. Avoid hitting oncoming traffic or immovable objects--they are basically the worst type of collision. 
2. If you must hit an object, hit it at an agle, never head-on. Let it be a glancing blow. 
3. Pick your targets: let them be stuff that can absorb the energy gradually without smashing your car (and you). Bushes are an example. 
4. If part of your car must be hit, let it be the rear trunk area. Rear wheels and back.


## How to act immediately after a collision

A. Assist the injured. Call 911 and render first aid if needed. 

B. Be visible. Use triagles and hazard flashers. 

C. Communicate. Call the police. Avoid admitting fault or the conditions of the collision unless its the police or an authorized claims rep. 

D. Document the scence. Take pictures of the damage to both vehicles, as well as any other relevant details such as skid marks, road conditions, and weather conditions. Find witnesses and ask for their names and phone numbers. 

E. Exchange names, addresses, VINs, registration numbers, insurance companies, insurance policy numbers with other humans who were involved in the collision.

F. File an accident report with the police. After they have concluded their investigation, ask them for a copy of the accident report. 


## Under normal crash circumstances, you must
1. Notify police
2. Submit a report
3. Remain at scene

## Blaming talk

* Avoid accusing, admitting fault, arguing, or signing statements except where required by a LEO. 
* No one can force you to give an opinion on the crash. 

## Pull over into a safe location when needed. 
