# Vehicle Failures

There are always risks of a vehicle breakdown. 

In the event of a breakdown, **pull over** and **call for help.**

Use high-visibility tools, like triangles. Turn on hazard flashers.

## Triangles

Position one at each value behind your car
* 100 ft
* 200 ft
* 300 ft

## Signaling for help
* Raise hood.
* Tie white cloth to antenna or door handle.
* Remain in vehicle and call for help.

## If your car is towed
Before consenting to a towing, determine
* the cost of the towing
* whether it is covered under your insurance
* where the tow truck will take your vehicle
* whether you need to find a separate ride to that place

## Engine Failure

When your engine fails, your power steering and power braking can be affected, which means you could need to use more force to apply them. 

Putting your gear into neutral can help you retain forward momentum as you signal and pull over. Turn on hazard lights.

### Most Common Engine Failures
* Malfunctioning fuel injection system
* Discharged battery
* Ignition system troubles
* Low coolant level
* Defective thermostat
* Broken belts

### Unintended acceleration
1. For automatic transmission cars, **place foot firmly on brake pedal BEFORE shifting into drive.**
2. In the event you still experience unintended acceleration, shift to neutral and apply brakes. If manual, apply clutch pedal. 
3. Once safely off of the roadway, shut off the engine.

Get used to your car's shifting mechanism. By the time you experience an emergency, you will need to be able to shift without taking eyes off the road. 


## Light failure

Shift the low/high beams switch to see if you can get any light. 

Turn on emergency flashers and pull over. 

## Blowout / Flat tire

* Do NOT apply brakes. Your reduced footprint plus hard course changes could cause a skid.
* Focus on staying in center of your lane.
* Turn on hazard flashers.
* Ease off the accellerator and safely pull over. 
* Gradually apply brakes as needed.
* Park in a safe place away from flowing traffic
* Set parking brake
* Set out triangles
* If you change the tire yourself, make sure you are protected from moving traffic. 

## Fire 

Fires are often caused by short-circuits. 

In the event of a vehicle fire:
1. Get 100+ feet away. The fuel take could explode like in GTA. 

## Brake failure

* Pump the brake pedal. This could help build just enough pressure to help 
* Use parking brake. Keep button depressed in order to prevent locking (which could result in a skid). Be prepared to release parking brake in the event of a skid.
* Downshift to at least get some slowing (but not stopping) force
* You can try using friction from scraping against side curbs to come to a stop. This can damage your car, but it can be well worth it when safety is on the line.
* Find an open area to slow down
* If you are out of options and need to hit something to stop, pick something soft that can give way when hit. 
* Set parking brake. 
* Turn on hazard flashers
* Turn off vehicle
* Setup triangles 
* Call your auto club. 

In the event of brake failure, DO NOT start it back up. Braking is one of the most critical control mechanisms for safety. 

Most brake failures happen as a result of improper maintenance or subpar materials.

USE YOUR HORN in the event of a brake failure. 

Driving uphill can help bring you to a stop. 



