# Managing Risk When Driving

Risk is a part of life. But there are many things that can be done to reduce the levels of risk that we must deal with. 

Younger, less experienced drivers are at heightened risk of crashes. 

Even advanced drivers may encounter situations that are challenging.

Drivers must continually assess the situation and take appropriate actions to reduce risk. They must also follow the traffic laws and stay in control of their vehicles under all road conditions. They must also be aware and respond to the various people and objects in their environment. 

About 1/2 of all new drivers get a traffic offense or a crash within their first 12 months. It can take 5 years for a new driver to obtain "average" skill. 

60% of teens who died in motor vehicle crashes were NOT wearing a seat belt.

Newbie drivers are 4x as likely to crash, compared to experienced drivers.

Risk factors for driving include
* Age
* Gender
* Driving experience

It can be easy to overestimate one's driving abilities. This can lead to bolder driving, which can heighten risk. 

There is a gender gap in driver risk up until about the age of 30. Young women are generally less risky drivers compared to young men drivers. 

A person might think their risk of a crash is <1:1000, but it is really more like 1:10.

>85% of drivers rate themselves as being better than average. LMAO. 

**While driving, think several moves ahead. Have a plan for how to evade collisions.**

Single-vehicle crashes (including on straight, rarely used rural roadways) account for 50% of vehicle occupant fatalities.

DRLs can make other drivers aware of your prescense 1 second early. This can make a big difference. 

When driving, assume other drivers will take the actions that put you most at risk. 

In many situations, separating risk objects by time and space (often via reducing speed) can be an effective tool is risk management.

Constantly scan the surroundings with your eyes to be aware of the situation. This includes the road ahead, as well as objects in and around it. 

Make good decisions. 

Signal your intentions.

Act on your decisions. 

**4 S's**
1. Seeing
2. Signaling
3. Space
4. Speed
