# Traffic Control Devices - Signs, Signals and Road Markings

Like many things, data flow and information processing are important elements of a safe and efficient road system.

Road signs, signals, and road markings play an important role in helping drivers with navigation, legal compliance, and avoiding collisions. 

## Signs

Shapes and colors are key.

### Colors

Red: Prohibition or STOP
* STOP sign: 
  * Red octagon with word "STOP". 
  * Means come to a full stop. 
* YIELD sign:
  * Red inverted triangle.
  * Means yield the right of way to oncoming traffic. 
* DO NOT ENTER sign:
  * Red circle with white bar
  * Means don't enter that way.


Yellow: Caution
* Green-yellow: vulnerable users
* Yellow: general caution
  * Merge signs require change in speed and position to zip into the merging traffic.
  * Railroad advanced warning signs are round. 

Orange: Construction zone

Pink: Temporary incident response

Green: Navigation

Blue: Services

Brown: Recreation and tourism

Black and white: Legal compliance
* Follow the rules written on them. 
* Railroad crossing "crossbuck" signs are for imminent railroad intersections.


Slow-moving vehicles have their own psudo-triangular sign to watch out for. 

### Reading
When signs use words, they are typically read from top to bottom. But with symbols it's generally the opposite.

### Interstate System Signs

An Interstate Highway has a 2-digit number.

East-West have even num.

North-South have odd.


#### Add-ons
Interstate LOOP: 3 digits, starting with an even num. Connects to Interstate at 2 ends.

Interstate SPUR: 3 digits, starting with an odd num. Connects to Interstate at only 1 end.

## Signals

Green light, yellow light, red light. 

When stopping at intersections, stop BEFORE the pedestrian crosswalk. 

### Green
Proceed when safe.

### Yellow
Safely stop before intersection, else proceed through. 

##### Flashing yellow
Slow down. Be careful.

### Red
Stop before intersection.

#### Flashing red
Stop. 


## Reversible lanes

Red: stay out. Oncoming traffic has this lane. 

Yellow: Get out. It's about to turn red.

Green: You may use this lane while safe. 

## Left-turn lanes
Use only for left turns. 

Safety tip: While waiting in the left-turn lane, keep tires pointed straight. This helps reduce the risks in the event of a surprise rear collission. 

Safety tip: When stopping at an intersection to turn left, self-stagger your car to give other turners more margin. 
