# Administrative Laws & Rules of the Road

Traffic laws

Your license is the property of the state. 

If you fail to uphold the laws, your driving privileges can be taken away via...

## Suspension
Taking away a license for <1 year after which they get it back.

## Revocation
Permanent removal of license. Person must reapply after a minimum of 1 year. 

***

There is also a points system.

## Financial responsibility

Never drive uninsured. 

## Right of Way

Who goes first?

Right of way is given, not taken.

NEVER ASSUME THAT THE OTHER DRIVER WILL YIELD THE RIGHT OF WAY TO YOU. 

Be prepared for them to act uncourteously. Graciously accept if they prove themselves otherwise. 

### Principles of Right of Way
1. Prevent traffic conflict. 
2. Right of way cannot be taken, it must given by the other driver.
3. A driver must be following the law in order to have right of way.
4. If you force others to change their course of action (slow or wait), then you have not yielded right of way.
5. If you CAN avoid a collision, you MUST avoid a collision.

### Traffic calming
Roundabouts

Speed bumps

Raised pedestrian crossings
***

ALWAYS avoid collisions. Yield to pedestrians who are legally crossing. 

At an intersection, if 2 drivers arrive at the same time, then the driver on the right has right of way. The driver on the left must yield.

Do NOT enter an intersection unless you have a clear path out. Failing to do this can cause gridlock.

Yield to first responders with flashing lights.

If a school bus shows up with its STOP signs out, then everybody on that road must stop. (Exception for opposite side of DIVIDED highways.)

Pedestrian-friendliness is important for places in-town.


When turning, STAY IN YOUR LANE.

If a funeral procession is happening, then DON'T PASS between member cars. 
