# Getting Ready to Drive: Getting Acquainted with Your Vehicle

Establish good driving habits. This includes pre-drive checks.

## Pre-Driving Checks

Before driving, check that the vehicle is safe to operate. 
Make any useful adjustments to the seat, mirrors, etc. to 
optimize your comfort, capability, and situational awareness.

Make sure all occupants (including yourself) are properly secured with seat belts. 

Look for movement. Make sure other drivers see you.

## Pre-launch inspection
1. Under vehicle
    1. Check for objects that could interfere with operation.
    2. Check for leaking fluids or detached parts.  
2. Around vehicle
    1. Make sure that you have a clear path of travel.
    2. Make sure nothing is about to enter your immediate path of travel. Children are particularly at risk of being killed by backing vehicles.
3. On vehicle
    1. Tire damage
    2. Lights/signals/reflectors
    3. Windows
    4. Mirrors
    5. Wipers
4. In the vehicle
    1. Confirm seats and trunk don't have any stowaways. This is important to prevent carjacking and other dangers.

## Under the Hood

Become familiar with your vehicle's stuff under the hood. Be able to identify when something is obviously wrong. 

1. Battery
2. Fluids
    1.  Brake fluid
    2.  Engine oil
    3.  Power steering fluid
    4.  Radiator fluid
    5.  Transmission fluid
    6.  Windshield washer fluid
3. Air filter assembly
4. Belts

## Car contents
Before driving, smartly check the objects that you will be transporting. In the event of a collision, loose objects may turn into "missiles".
Store things with consideration for the laws of physics. Heavy items can be placed low, such as at the foot of the back seats. Large objects can be stored in the trunk.

## **PRE-DRIVE ROUTINE**

1. Approach car with key. 
2. Check for children or objects behind/in front of car.
3. Enter vehicle.
4. Place key in the ignition.
5. Close and lock all doors. 
6. Check windows. If necessary, defrost and/or clean them.
7. Check your visual field. Make sure mirrors and lines of sight are as you expect. If objects in the car block vision, move them.
8. Check for "missiles". Make sure loose objects are secured. This is important because rapid accelleration can cause loose objects to strike occupants. 
9. Customize your seat, pedals, steering column, & headrest.
10. Do a quick survey of your surroundings and intended path of travel.
11. Carefully drive to your desired destination.


## Steering wheel

Position wheel 10-12 inches from chest. 

Your line of sight should be ~3 inches above the top of the wheel. 

Either the "9/3" or "7/5" positions work well. Higher positions can place your arms at risk in the event of steering wheel airbag deployment. 

## Mirrors
Ajust mirrors

Interior mirror:
* Should allow vision of entire back window.

Exterior mirrors:
* Should allow vision from edge of your vehicle outward.
* When setting, feel free to lean in the mirrors direction to simulate your true vision range.

Even properly set mirrors still have blind spots. Before making any lateral movement, be sure and check your appropriate blind spot for cars.

## Recalls
See https://www.nhtsa.gov/

Check 2x per year. Each Equinox or DST change, do this. 

## Keyless cars
Keyless cars have their own special set of risks. 
* Not putting the car in "park" when parking. (Not applying the parking brake.)
* Leaving the engine running after you leave. (Buildup of carbon monoxide.)

More: https://www.nhtsa.gov/driver-assistance-technologies/keyless-ignition-systems

