# Traffic Control Laws 👮🚓

All drivers must obey traffic control information systems, including signs, lights, and uniformed personnel. 

ALWAYS exercise due care.

Safety belts must be worn during vehicle operation.

Never move a vehicle unless it can be done so with reasonable safety.

When emerging from a driveway, STOP when you approach a sidewalk or cross road. YOU need to stop there to get a better, updated view of traffic and pedestrian conditions befor proceeding.

There are unposted default speed limits for each state. 

When passing through on a road, stay in the center lane or right lane. Reserve the left lane for passing. Don't be that a--hole who blocks the passing lane.

Give emergency responders plenty of space when passing their scene. #SlowDownMoveOver

Don't tailgate. Leave plenty of room between your car and the one ahead. Generally the car behind is going to be found at fault in the event of a tailgating collision.

Signal turns with your hands or with turn signal lights.

Signal turns at least 100 feet in advance of your turn. Signal to the vehicle behind you that you are going to slow down by tapping the brakes a couple times. 


Intersections, crosswalks, RR Xing, these are types of intersections. 

Don't enter an intersection until you have confirmed space available to fully accomodate your car on the other side of the intersection.

NEVER open car doors unless it is reasonably safe to do so. 

Always limit time that the doors are open on roadsides to that which is necessary to unload passengers. 

When opening doors, don't interfere with traffic. 

## Unattended vehicle

1. Turn off engine 
2. Take key out of ignition
3. Set parking brake 
4. turn wheels (if appropriate for incline)

## Safe Traffic Stops
1. Let officer know you see them and that you WILL be pulling over at the soonest safe opportunity. Reduce speed significantly and come to a full stop at a safe and roomy spot beside the road (preferably on the right side).
2. Set parking brake.
3. Turn radio down to 0.
4. Roll down window completely
5. If night, turn on interior light
6. Keep safety belts fastened
7. Stay calm and graceful
8. Let officer see your hands. Hands on steering wheel is a great option. Hands on window frame is another option.
9. Have passengers place their hands in open positions for the officer to see. Instruct passengers to be quiet during the interaction.
10. When the officer arrives at your window, let them start the conversation.
11. While talking
    1. Be polite
    2. Be patient
    3. Be respectful
    4. Be truthful
    5. Know your constitutional rights
    6. Follow officer orders.
    7. Don't answer questions that aren't asked.
    8. Listen to the officer
12. The officer will likely ask for license, registration, and proof of insurance. 
    1. Do NOT just reach for them.
    2. Tell the officer where each item is located 
    3. Slowly reach for each item, preferably with one hand constantly on the wheel. 
    4. Provide the documents as requested
13. If you get a citation
    1. Receive it gracefully
    2. Understand what follow-up steps you will be required to take
14. Safely leave ONLY after the officer says you are free to go.


### DO NOT
* Accelerate, 
* Make sudden movements
* Attempt to grab your docs before asked by the officer.
* Try to argue with the officer
* Attempt bribes
* Be mouthy
* Ask immediately why you were pulled over
* Argue your case (do that later in court if needed)
* Be an a--hole



