# Space to the front, sides, and rear

Good decisions requires good data.

Always choose the action that involves the least amount of risk. 

## Favor paths that...
1. Maximize your visibility
2. Provide margin space to your sides
3. Smoothen your flow of traffic
4. Provide the best surface for driving


Rear-end collisions can be COMPLETELY eliminated (in theory) if drivers manage space properly.

Give yourself (and others) room for mistakes. 

Under IDEAL conditions, it can take a car about 4-5 seconds to go from highway speeds to a full stop. Changes in traction, weight, brake quality, and more can increase this stopping time. 

Have alternate or "escape" routes in mind in the event of trouble.

ALWAYS HAVE AN ESCAPE PATH THAT CAN ACCOMODATE YOUR FULL STOPPING DISTANCE. 

## Following distance

1. Find a fixed object.
2. When the vehicle ahead passes it count until you pass it.
3. The time should be 3-4 secs or more under normal conditions. 

However, increast the time to 4-5 secs or more for
* Weather
* Following large vehicles

For each adverse condition, increase following distance by 1 sec.

When traffic stops, stop while you can see the rear tires (and a bit of margin road) for the vehicle ahead.

**Other cars may not have proper following distances. Don't let that dissuade you from holding firm to following distances that YOU know to be safe.**

## Side distances
Keep a car width between you and things to the sides.

## Rear distances
This one is mostly outside of your control. You can take certain measures to be nice (pre-tap brakes, accommodate passing attempts, etc.) but the distance between your rear bumper and the car behind you is determined by that car's driver.

If that car seems to be driven agressively, it may be worth you pulling over at a safe opportunity so that they can zoom far ahead (and out of your life).

## Stay out of packs

***

If you must choose the most important directions to have margin, they are
* Front and
* At least one side
