# Steering and Accelerating

## Starting your vehicle

When starting the car, ensure it's gear is in park, its parking brake is on, and your foot is on the brake pedal.

After starting, take a look at the gauges to identify any anomalies.

Turn on low-beams (But remember to turn them back off when you end your ride.)

## Steering

9 and 3

8 and 4

Push-Pull vs. Hand-over-hand methods


Having both hands on wheel maximizes control.

### Push-pull
Good for straight road or gradual turns

Neither hand crosses the 12 o'clock or 6 o'clock.


### Hand-over-hand
Good for very sharp turns, but is riskier in the event of airbag deployment.


### Single handed driving
Not recommended. 

Good for backing up. But of course, back up slowly. 

While backing up, occasionally check front to ensure no unexpected or imminent contact.

Grip at 12 o'clock with left hand. Brace right hand on passenger seat.


## Steering Errors

Sudden steering input can impact vehicle balance.


Look at the road ahead. Have a visual target that is sufficiently far ahead.

When making precision maneuvers where space is limited, give less space to your own side of the vehicle, since you are closer and can better judge space.

Steering corrections must be made quickly and moderately. Don't delay. Don't overdo it.

Power steering makes it easier to turn, but also easier to make steering errors.

## Feet on pedals
Brake and accelerate with your RIGHT foot. This ensures that you are exclusively applying pressure to only one of them at a time.

## Before takeoff
1. Check parking brake
2. Step on brake pedal
3. Shift into gear
4. Disengage parking brake
5. Release brake pedal 

## Acceleration

There are different intensity levels that are for different types of situations.




