# Driver Condition Laws

Reckless driving is counterproductive to the values of safety and efficiency, and is therefore BAD.

Reckless driving involves the use of improper driving techniques
* Speeding 20-25+ mph over the limit
* Speeding in a school zone
* DUI
* Failing to yield
* Turning from wrong lane

## What constitutes reckless driving?
The driver
* is deliberately driving in a dangerous manner
* should know that such driving poses danger to others
* the situation at the time makes the risk level obvious and serious.

**WILLFUL** and **WANTON**

Some states are considering criminal laws against agressive driving (like tailgating).

|Agressive Driving|Road Rage|
|-|-|
|Driver in bad mood and drives aggressively without specific animus toward any other particular driver|Driver has beef with specific driver(s) and engages in dangerous road behaviours toward them.|

## NEVER Race on Public Roads
## NEVER Drink and Drive
Alcohol contributes to 30% of vehicle fatalities.

AAA's Driver Ed says that, due to all states having implied consent laws, a driver who is arrested for DUI is legally required to submit to a test for the prescence of alcohol. AAA says that drivers should go along with what the officer says.

However, several lawyers clearly advise AGAINST consenting to a field sobriety test, and that such tests are often voluntary.


## Vehicular Homicide
If you break traffic laws and it results in someone getting killed, then you could be charged with vehicular homicide.


## Distracted Driving
Don't drive while using
* Headphones
* phone/mobile device

## Drowsy Driving

## Littering
Don't be a litter bug.

## Children must be in age-appropriate seats
Children should ideally stay in the back seat until about 13. 
## Every occupant must wear a safety belt.
