# Economical and Trouble-free Driving - Fuel Economy

Fuel and maintenance are a typical drivers' 2 biggest ongoing expenses. 

Conserving fuel and reducing emissions can be both economically and ecologically smart. 

In general, the faster you accelerate, the more fuel you use and the more emissions you produce. 

Here are some tips. Of course, if there is a conflict between safty and fuel economy, always do the safe thing. 

## Maximizing fuel economy

* Avoid unnecessary idling. 
* Accelerate **slowly** and **smoothly**. 
* If you have a stop coming up soon, lift off of the accelerator. Coast for a bit before braking. 
* Brake early, but not extremely. Don't upset the drivers behind you.
* Look ahead. Being well aware of what's far ahead can help you plan ahead for both safety and fuel efficiency. 
* Be smooth in your inputs. 

## Fuel Saving Tips

* Minimize the degree to which you must accelerate or decelerate while driving.
* Where allowed, park in spaces that will allow you to simply drive forward and out, rather than backing out. 
* Pre-plan all the stops you need to make for each trip. This can reduce the miles needed to do all those things around town.
* If you have a problematic left turn (on your normal route) that requires excessive idling (0 mpg), then consider changing your route to minimize such waiting. Consider making 3 right turns instead.
* Carpool.
* When not in use, remove roof racks and other optional drag-increasing equipment.
* Remove excess weight from cargo. 
* If you commonly use toll roads, consider a toll tag, which may allow you to maintain your speed and pass through a certain lane at the gate. 
* When planning a big trip, use fuel cost calculator tools to optimize your refueling stops. Gas prices vary by location. 
* Slow down.
* Check your tires. Proper tire pressure is important for fuel economy.
* Maintain your car properly.

## Ethanol
Ethanol, a form of alcohol, is often mixed with gasolene. E-10: 10% ethanol. E-85: 85% ethanol. and so on.

## Fuel saving tech

* Idle elimination (stop-start) tech
* 
