# Travel Planning and Prep

## Navigational tools

* Traditional maps
* Electronic travel planning systems
* GPS

## Toll booths

* Have cash on hand
* Slow down early
* Pick your lane

## Trip cost estimation

Use an online trip cost planning tool to estimate fuel and toll costs. 

## Weather and traffic

Check up-to-date conditions. Adjust plans as necessary.

## Prepping vehicle for the trip

Before a major trip, have the car inspected to make sure it will be able to handle the rigors of the trip ahead. 
* Tires
* Belts
* Hoses
* Fluids

## Cargo placement
* Place heaviest items closer to the center bottom of the car. 
* Make sure cargo does not block the rearview mirror.
* Make sure you have a bag with your daily essentials that is easily accessible, not deeply buried. 

## Preparing YOU for the drive

* Start fresh. Get a good night's sleep beforehand.
* Drive during normal working hours.
* Avoid long stretches of driving.
* Stop and rest periodically.

## Pets
If you are traveling with pets, make sure they are properly restrained. 

## Handling large vehicles

Larger vehicles weigh more, take up more space, and have higher centers of mass. 

Give yourself more space when turning, decelerating, and accelerating. 

Slow down before turning.

## Towing

Trailers come in all shapes and sizes. 

Practice turning and driving before you go to the highway.

Guard against swaying. 

Before towing, check to make sure you do so
* legally and
* with insurance coverage (check with your insurance provider to see if you already have it)

