# The Effects of Illness, Disability, and Drugs on Driver Performance

## Temporary illness

Your physical vigor can be affected by sickness. Get well soon. <3

Think: How can this sickness impact my driving capabilities?
* Vision
* Focus
* Coordination
* Strength
* Judgement

## Long-term/permanent Disabilities

Physical controls that can be impacted:
* Steering wheel
* Pedals
* Viewing the mirrors

Can get handicapped indicators to park in handicapped spaces.

## Chronic Disease
A health condition that is ongoing and continues to affect the body
* Asthma
* Epilepsy
* Cancer
* Heart disease
* Diabetes, 
* etc.

## Drugs

A drug is a medicine or other substance which has a physiological effect when ingested or otherwise introduced into the body.

Drugs include
* Ethanol
* Caffeine
* Nicotine
* THC
* CBD
* Fentanyl
* and more.

Due to their physiological effects of drugs, they can have an impact on your driving ability.

Drugs commonly have side effects. 

READ THE LABELS. 

Stay away from street drugs. In addition to being illegal, they have severe risks of substitution and contamination. At the time of this writing, fentanyl is the latest big problem that law enforcement is trying to raise awareness about. Even a super tiny contamination of fentanyl can be lethal.

Most drugs affect the nervous system. 

Stimulants heighten the level of nervous activity.

Depressants lower it. 

Hallucinogens promote altered states of consciousness, such as "seeing" objects that aren't really there. 

To drive your best, your brain must be operating normally and clearly.




