# Reduced Traction and Handling Skids.


Slippery road surfaces can be a huge safety risk due to them detracting from driver control.

* snow
* ice
* rain
* anything other than the intended road surface

In wet weather, reduce speed by about 20%. 

Be smooth with steering and braking.

In snowy weather, reduce speed by 50%. 


In icy weather, reconsider travel plans or SLOW THE FUCK DOWN. 

If it's cold out and you are about to cross a bridge, then SLOW THE FUCK DOWN.

## Tires

Different tires are optimized for different road conditions

* Summer tires
* All-season (compromise between summer and winter)
* Winter tires

Switching tire types based on season can help.

## Hydroplaning

Standing water can interfere with traction when going 30+ mph. So if you experience standing water of any depth, then SLOW THE FUCK DOWN. Gradually, of course! 

Warning signs:
* Standing water
* rain that "bubbles" upon impact with road.
* tires make slushing sound
* sensation that the steering wheel is loose

If you experience hydroplaning, take pressure off the accelerator. Don't brake. Regain traction and regain control.

## Veering off the road

* stay calm
* avoid hard inputs
* stabilize path
* coast/slow down
* re-enter road as normal
* take emergency actions as necessary

## Evasive actions

* Evasive steering
* Evasive braking
* Evasive acceleration

### With ABS
* Stop if you can
* if there's not enough room, you can steer evasively, with simultaneous braking if needed. 

### Without ABS
* Stop if you can 
* if there's not enough room, steer evasively,
* Then brake after, if needed.

### Evasive acceleration is also a thing

If a literal train derailment is happening 20 feet behind you, then GET THE FUCK AWAY. Safely, of course! 🙂



## Skids

If you experience a skid, first regain control of the vehicle. This means being gradual, not slamming the brakes or anything.

**Continue to look and steer toward your intended path of travel.**




