# Drowsy Driving


Driving drowsy can have similar effects to driving under the influence

Awake for 18 hours ≈ BAC .05

Awake for 24 hours ≈ BAC .10


Solution: GET REST.

According to the National Sleep Foundation, 36% of U.S. drivers admit to having fallen asleep at the wheel. WHAT??!

Shift workers are at increased risk of drowsy driving. 

Listen to what your body is telling you. If you are feeling drowsy, get some rest. 

## Warning signs (pull over as soon as safely possible when you notice these):
* Difficulty focusing
* Repeated yawning
* Lane drifting
* Daydreaming
* Trouble keeping head up
* Trouble remembering the last few miles driven
* Missing exits or traffic signs
* Hitting a shoulder rumble strip
* Tailgating
* Feeling restless and irritable

## Prevention
* Get enough rest (≈7-9 hrs and on a regular schedule)
* For road trips, pre-plan your stopping breaks. Plan a stop about every 100 miles or 2 hours. 
* When doing a long road trip, have a passenger buddy. They can remind you to take breaks, and you can also drive in shifts.
* Avoid medications that promote drowsiness.

Long, boring roads can lack exciting stimuli, leading to higher risk of drowsy driving.

## Road Breaks
* 10 minutes long
* Restrooms
* Food
* Fuel
* Push-ups

## Don't overextend yourself

Remember: No road trip is worth your life.

## Roadside resting

Usually, it is better sleep at home. But if you must sleep on the roadside, here are some tips for staying safe:
1. Stop at a place where security is present.
2. After dark, find a populated and lit area.
3. Give yourself some fresh air, but ensure windows are closed enough to prevent outside entry.
4. Lock all doors and turn off engine.
