# Notes on C from Sololearn
https://www.sololearn.com/learning/1089

## Introducing C
C is a 50+ years old, general-purpose programming language.

C is used for OS's (including Windows and many others) to complex 
programs like the Python interpreter, Git, Oracle DB, and many more.
C is versatile on purpose. It is a low-level language that relates 
closely to the way machines work while still being easy to learn.

> Understanding how computer memory works is an important aspect of 
> the C programming language. 

## Hello World!
```
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    printf("Hello, World!\n");
    return 0;
}
```
OUTPUT: 
```
Hello, World!
```
As when learning any new language, the place to start is with the 
classic "Hello World!" program: Let's break down the code to understand 
each line:
`#include <stdio.h>` The function used for generating output is defined 
in `stdio.h`. In order to use the `printf` function, we need to first include 
the required file, also called a header file.

`int main()` 

The `main()` function is the entry point to a program. 
Curly brackets `{ }` indicate the beginning and end of a function (also called 
a code block). The statements inside the brackets determine what the function 
does when executed.

*Why is `int` used instead of `func`? I would like to find out.*

```
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    printf("Hello, World!\n");
    return 0;
}
```
The `printf` function is used to generate output: Here, we pass the text `"Hello World!"` to it.
The `\n` escape sequence outputs a newline character. Escape sequences always begin with a backslash `\`.
The semicolon `;` indicates the end of the statement. Each statement must end with a semicolon.

`return 0;` This statement terminates the `main()` function and returns the value `0` to the calling process. The number `0` generally means that our program has successfully executed. Any other number indicates that the program has failed.


## Data Types


C supports the following basic data types:
`int`: integer, a whole number.
`float`: floating point, a number with a fractional part.
`double`: double-precision floating point value.
`char`: single character.

The amount of storage required for each of these types varies by platform.
C has a built-in `sizeof` operator that gives the memory requirements for a particular data type.
For example: The program output displays the corresponding size in bytes for each data type.
The `printf` statements in this program have two arguments. The first is the output string with a format specifier (`%ld`), while the next argument returns the `sizeof` value. In the final output, the `%ld` (for long decimal) is replaced by the value in the second argument.

```
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    printf("int: %ld \n", sizeof(int));
    printf("float: %ld \n", sizeof(float));
    printf("double: %ld \n", sizeof(double));
    printf("char: %ld \n", sizeof(char));

    return 0;
}
```
Output:
```
int: 4 
float: 4 
double: 8 
char: 1 

```

**Note that C does not have a boolean type.** <-- This is interesting. Maybe I will need to use `1` and `0` instead of `True` and `False`. I will find out. ¯\\_ (ツ)_/¯

A `printf` statement can have multiple format specifiers with corresponding arguments to replace the specifiers. Format specifiers are also referred to as conversion specifiers.
We will learn more about format specifiers in the upcoming lessons.



## Variables

A variable is a name for an area in memory.
The name of a variable (also called the identifier) must begin with either a letter or an underscore and can be composed of letters, digits, and the underscore character.
Variable naming conventions differ, however using lowercase letters with an underscore to separate words is common (snake_case). This is similar to Python's naming conventions.
Variables must also be declared as a data type before they are used.

*Is it better to have explicitly or implicitly declared data types?* I guess it depends on the use-case and the level of skill of the person involved. If your development time is your biggest constraint and your project is small and quick, then maybe implicit would work. Even if the code runs at suboptimal efficiency, the task will be solved. Otherwise, it may be wiser to use explicit data type declaration in order to make it easy for you as the dev to be constantly reminded about what your code does under the hood in order to better diagnose bugs and optimize your code efficiency. 

The value for a declared variable is changed with an assignment statement.
For example, the following statements declare an integer variable my_var and then assigns it the value 42:
```
int my_var;

my_var = 42;
```

You can also declare and initialize (assign an initial value) a variable in a single statement. This makes sense in many cases, but it may sometimes be useful to declare first and then assign a value later:

`int my_var = 42;`

Let's define variables of different types, do a simple math operation, and output the results: As you can see, you can declare multiple variables on a single line by separating them with a comma. Also, notice the use of format specifiers for float (`%f`) and char (`%c`) output.
The C programming language is case-sensitive, so `my_Variable` and `my_variable` are two different identifiers.

```
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    int a, b;
    float salary = 56.23;
    char letter = 'Z';
    a = 8;
    b = 34;
    int c = a+b;

    printf("%d \n", c);
    printf("%f \n", salary);
    printf("%c \n", letter);

    return 0;
}
```

Output:
```
42 
56.230000 
Z 

```

### But what if we try to print the `salary` variable without the stuff in quotes `"%f \n"`?


```
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    
    float salary = 19570.2938;
    
    printf(salary);

    return 0;
}
```

We get this error:
```
./Playground/file0.c: In function 'main':
./Playground/file0.c:7:12: error: incompatible type for argument 1 of 'printf'
    7 |     printf(salary);
      |            ^~~~~~
      |            |
      |            float
In file included from ./Playground/file0.c:1:
../Playground/:332:43: note: expected 'const char * restrict' but argument is of type 'float'
  332 | extern int printf (const char *__restrict __format, ...);
      |                    ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~^~~~~~~~


```
